Mikhail Yuryevich Lermontov was born at night from October 2 to 3 (October 15, according to a new style) in 1814 in a house opposite the Red Gate Square - the very one where the most famous monument to the poet stands today.

Lermontov’s mother was not seventeen at that time, and his father had a reputation as an attractive, but frivolous person. The real power in the family was in the hands of the poet’s grandmother - Elizabeth Arsenyeva. It was she who insisted that the boy be called not Peter, as his father wanted, but Michael.

Young Lermontov was not distinguished by good health or cheerful disposition.



All his childhood he was sick with scrofula. A slender boy with an eating disorder and a rash all over his body caused peers to be neglected and ridiculed. "Deprived of the opportunity to have fun with the ordinary amusements of children, Sasha began to look for them in himself ..." - Lermontov wrote in one of his autobiographical stories. The more often Lermontov was unwell, the more intensely his grandmother was engaged in his treatment and education. In 1825, she brought him to the Caucasus - this is how the most important place-name for him arose in Lermontov’s life. “The Caucasus mountains are sacred to me,” the poet wrote.

Since September 1830, the poet studied at Moscow University - first at the moral and political, and then at the verbal department. Later, after the Caucasus, Lermontov will also call the University his “holy place”.

True, Mikhail did not seek the friendship of fellow students, did not accept participation in student circles, and disputed disputes. Among the “ignored” Lermontov was Vissarion Belinsky: for the first time they talked much later - during the poet’s first arrest. At the end of the second year at the rehearsal examinations on rhetoric, heraldry and numismatics, Lermontov demonstrated well-read beyond the program and ... almost complete ignorance of the lecture material. There were disputes with the examiners. So in the records of the administration opposite the name of Lermontov there was a note in Latin: consilium abeundi (“advised to leave”). After that, the young man moved to Petersburg.